# 有限域
##Generalities

### Finite Fields

> **Def**: [Characteristic]
> Let $K$ be a field. The image of $\mathbf{Z}$ in $K$ is an integral domain, hence isomorphic to $\mathbf{Z}$ or to $\mathbf{Z} / p \mathbf{Z},$ where $p$ is prime; 
> Its field of fractions is isomorphic to $\mathbf{Q}$ or to $\mathbf{Z} / p \mathbf{Z}=\mathbf{F}_{p}$. In the first case, one says that $K$ is of characteristic zero; in the second case, that $K$ is of characteristic $p$ .

The characteristic of $K$ is denoted by $\operatorname{char}(K) .$ If $\operatorname{char}(K)=p \neq 0, p$ is also the smallest integer $n>0$ such that $n\cdot1=0$ .

> **Lemma**: If $\operatorname{char}(K)=p,$ the map $\sigma : x \mapsto x^{p}$ is an isomorphism of $K$ onto one of its subfields $K^{p}$ .

> **Theorem** 1 :
>
> i) The characteristic of a finite field $K$ is a prime number $p \neq 0 ;$ if $f=\left[K : \mathbf{F}_{p}\right],$ the number of elements of $K$ is $q=p^{f}$ . 
>
> ii) Let $p$ be a prime number and let $q=p^{f}(f \geqslant 1)$ be a power of $p .$ Let $\Omega$  be an algebraically closed field of characteristic p. There exists a unique subfield $\mathbf{F}_{q}$ of $\Omega$ which has $q$ elements. It is the set of roots of the polynomial $X^{q}-X .$ 
>
> iii) All finite fields with $q=p^{f}$ elements are isomorphic to $\mathbf{F}_{\boldsymbol{q}}$

### The multiplicative group of a finite field

> **Theorem** 2: The multiplicative group $F^*_q$ of a finite field $F_q$ is cyclic of order $q-1$ .  

证明可见丘维声p27.

> **Lemma** $1 :$ If $n$ is an integer $\geqslant 1,$ then $n=\sum_{d \mid n} \phi(d)$

> **Lemma** $2 :$ Let $H$ be a finite group of order $n$ . Suppose that, for all divisors d of $n,$ the set of $x \in H$ such that $x^{d}=1$ has at most $d$ elements. Then $H$ is cyclic.

The above shows that all finite subgroups of the multiplicative group of a field are cyclic.

## Equations over a finite field

Let $q$ be a power of a prime number $p,$ and let $K$ be a field with $q$ elements.

### Power Sums

方幂和：$\sum_{x\in K}x^u$ 

> **Lemma**: Let $u$ be an integer $\geqq 0 .$  
> $$
> S\left(X^{\prime \prime}\right)=\sum_{x \in K} x^{u} =\left\{\begin{array}{l}{-1}\text{ if }u \text{ is }\geqq 1\text{ and divisible by } q-1 ;\\ {0}   \ \text{otherwise}\end{array}\right.
> $$
>

### Chevalley Theorem

> **Theorem** 3: Let $f_{\alpha} \in K\left[X_{1}, \ldots, X_{n}\right]$ be polynomials in $n$ variables such that $\sum_{\alpha} \operatorname{deg} f_{\alpha}<n,$ and let $V$ be the set of their common zeros in $K^{n}$ . One has
> $$
> \operatorname{Card}(V) \equiv 0 \quad(\bmod p)
> $$
>

> **Corollary** 1: If $\sum \operatorname{deg} f_{\alpha}<n$ and if the $f_{\alpha}$ have no constant term, then the $f_{\alpha}$ have a nontrivial common zero.
>
> **Corollary** 2:  All quadratic forms in at least 3 variables over $K$ have a non trivial zero. (所有至少三个变量的二次型在K上有非平凡零点)
>
> 有限域上每个二次超曲面有有理点。

## Quadratic reciprocity law

### Squares in $F_q$

Let $q$ be a power of a prime number $p$ . $a$ is squares in $F_q$ is equal to $x^2\equiv a(\bmod q)$ . 

> **Theorem** 4: (a) If $p=2,$ then all elements of $\mathbf{F}_{\mathbf{q}}$ are squares.
>
> (b) If $p \neq 2,$ then the squares of $\mathbf{F}_{\boldsymbol{q}}^{*}$ form $a$ subgroup of index 2 in $\mathbf{F}_{\boldsymbol{q}}^{*}$ this subgroup is the kernel of the homomorphism $x \mapsto x^{(q-1) / 2}$ with values in $\{ \pm 1\} .$  
>
> (In other terms, one has an exact sequence:
>
> $$
> 1 \rightarrow \mathbf{F}_{q}^{* 2} \rightarrow \mathbf{F}_{q}^{*} \rightarrow\{ \pm 1\} \rightarrow 1 . )
> $$
>



### Legendre symbol

> **Definition**: Let $p$ be a prime number $\neq 2,$ and let $x \in \mathbf{F}_{p}^{*} .$ The Legendre symbol of $x,$ denoted by $\left(\frac{x}{p}\right),$ is the integer $x^{(p-1) / 2}=\pm 1 .$ 

It is convenient to extend $\left(\frac{x}{p}\right)$ to all of $\mathbf{F}_{p}$ by putting $\left(\frac{0}{p}\right)=0$ , Moreover if $x \in \mathbf{Z}$ has for image $x^{\prime} \in \mathbf{F}_{p},$ one writes $\left(\frac{x}{p}\right)=\left(\frac{x^{\prime}}{p}\right)$ . 

> > 因此，只需考虑 $\mathbf{F}_{p}$的元素即可。

由欧拉判别法

> $a$ is a square $\Leftrightarrow$ $a^{\frac{p-1}{2}}\equiv 1 (\bmod p)$   

可得：
$$
\left(\frac{a}{p} \right)=\left\{\begin{aligned} 1,&\ a \text{ is a square in $F_q$}\\-1,&\ a\text{ is not a square}\\0,&\ p\mid a  \end{aligned}\right.
$$
Define
$$
\varepsilon(n) \equiv \frac{n-1}{2}(\bmod 2)=\left\{\begin{array}{l}{0 \text { if } n \equiv 1(\bmod 4)} \\ {1 \text { if } n \equiv-1(\bmod 4)} \end{array}\right.\\
\omega(n) \equiv \frac{n^{2}-1}{8}(\bmod 2)=\left\{\begin{array}{l}{0 \text { if } n \equiv \pm 1(\bmod 8)} \\ {1 \text { if } n \equiv \pm 5(\bmod 8)}\end{array}\right.
$$

> **Theorem** 5: i) $\left(\frac{1}{p}\right)=1,$ 
>
> ii) $\left(\frac{-1}{p}\right)=(-1)^{\varepsilon(g)}$ 
>
> iii) $\left(\frac{2}{p}\right)=(-1)^{\omega(g)}$  

$$
\begin{aligned}-1 & \text { is a square }(\bmod p) \text { if and only if } p \equiv 1(\bmod 4) \\ 2 & \text { is a square }(\bmod p) \text { if and only if } p \equiv \pm 1(\bmod 8) \end{aligned}
$$

### Quadratic reciprocity law

Let $l$ and $p$ be two distinct prime numbers different from $2 .$

> **Theorem** 6 (Gauss). $\left(\frac{l}{p}\right)=\left(\frac{p}{l}\right) (-1)^{\varepsilon(l) \varepsilon(p)}$



# p-adic 域

## the ring $Z_p$ and the field $Q_p$ 

### Definitions

For every $n \geqq 1,$ let $A_{n}=\mathbf{Z} / p^{n} \mathbf{Z} ;$ it is the ring of classes of integers $\left(\bmod p^{n}\right) .$ An element of $A_{n}$ defines in an obvious way an element of $A_{n-1}$ ; we thus obtain a homomorphism
$$
\phi_{n} : A_{n} \rightarrow A_{n-1}
$$
which is surjective and whose kernel is $p^{n-1} A_{m}$ 

The sequence

$$
\ldots \rightarrow A_{n}  \rightarrow A_{n-1} \rightarrow \ldots \rightarrow A_{2} \rightarrow A_{1}
$$
forms a "projective system" indexed by the integers  $\geqq 1$ 

> **Definition** 1. - The ring of p-adic integers $\mathbf{Z}_{p}$ is the projective limit of the system $\left(A_{n}, \phi_{n}\right)$ defined above.



### Properties of $\mathbf{Z}_{p}$



### The field $\mathbf{Q}_{p}$



## p-adic equations

### Solutions



### Amelioration of approximate solutions.



## The multiplicative group of $\mathbf{Q}_{p}$ 

### The filtration of the group of units



### Structure of the group $\mathbf{U}_{\mathbf{1}}$  



### Squares in $\mathbf{Q}_{p}^{*}$  



# Hilbert Symbol

## Local properties 

### Definition and first properties



## Global properties

# Quadratic forms over $Q_{p}$ and over $Q$ 

## Quadratic forms

## Quadratic forms over $Q_{p}$  

## Quadratic forms over $Q$  

# Integral quadratic forms with discriminant $\pm 1$ 

## Preliminaries

## Statement of results

## Proofs







